Proposal for flattening attributes from OTLP messages (#21)
dynatrace-oss-contrib/opentelemetry-specification: specification/common/attribute-precedence.md

InstrumentationScope attributes, attributes on Spans/Metrics/Logs) to a
non-hierarchical representation (e.g., OpenMetrics labels).
In the case of OpenMetrics, the set of labels is completely flat and must have 
unique labels only 
(https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#labelset).
Since OpenTelemetry allows for different levels of attributes, it is feasible
that the same attribute appears multiple times on different levels.

This document aims to provide guidance on how OpenTelemetry attributes can be 
consistently mapped to flat sets.

## Attribute hierarchy in OTLP messages

Since the OTLP format is a hierarchical format, there is an inherent order in 
the attributes.
In this document, 
[Resource](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/sdk.md)
attributes are considered to be at the top of the hierarchy, since they are the
most general attributes. 
Attributes on individual Spans/Metric data points/Logs are at the bottom of the
hierarchy, as they are most specialized and only apply to a subset of all data.

> **A more specialized attribute that shares an attribute key with more general

Author: I was afraid about the other way... Where in the hierarchy is "further up"? Is the resource attribute higher? or is the data point higher, since it overwrites? I feel like "more general" and "more specialized" is clearer in that regard

attribute will take precedence and overwrite the more general attribute.**

When de-normalizing an OTLP message into a flat set of key-value pairs,
attributes that are present on the Resource and InstrumentationScope levels will
be attached to each Span/Metric data point/Log.

## Precedence per Signal

Below, the precedence for each of the signals is spelled out explicitly.
Only Spans, Metric data points and LogRecords are considered.

> Span Links, Span Events and Metric Exemplars need to be considered differently, 

Author: I moved it below in its own section - I think its clearer that way

non-hierarchical representation (e.g., OpenMetrics labels).
In the case of OpenMetrics, the set of labels is completely flat and must have 
unique labels only 
(https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#labelset).
Since OpenTelemetry allows for different levels of attributes, it is feasible
that the same attribute appears multiple times on different levels.

This document aims to provide guidance on how OpenTelemetry attributes can be 
consistently mapped to flat sets.

## Attribute hierarchy in OTLP messages

Since the OTLP format is a hierarchical format, there is an inherent order in 
the attributes.
In this document, 
[Resource](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/sdk.md)
attributes are considered to be at the top of the hierarchy, since they are the
most general attributes. 
Attributes on individual Spans/Metric data points/Logs are at the bottom of the
hierarchy, as they are most specialized and only apply to a subset of all data.

**A more specialized attribute that shares an attribute key with more general 

> attribute will take precedence.** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attribute will take precedence.**
```
extra space will fail linting step, I've seen a few of these. Leaving just this comment a a reminder to run markdownlint before opening the PR upstream. :slightly_smiling_face:

Author: good point, did the linting now, it should be okay i think!

> In some cases it might be desirable to overwrite an attribute like this.

Reviewer: I think it may be possible to remove this (and the example) and change the above to: 

```
**A more specialized attribute that shares an attribute key with more general 
attribute will take precedence and overwrite the more general attribute.**
```

Author: Nice! Still thinking about an example...

<!-- TODO example -->

When de-normalizing an OTLP message to a flat set of key-value pairs,
attributes that are present on the Resource and InstrumentationScope levels will

> be duplicated for each Span/Metric data point/Log.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be attached to each Span/Metric data point/Log.
```

not sure if this is an improvement, feel free to ignore :slightly_smiling_face:

## Precedence per Signal

Below, the precedence for each of the signals is spelled out explicitly.

> Only Spans, Metric data points and LogRecords are considered.

Reviewer: The casing seems a bit inconsistent here. Seems to reference directly `LogRecord` from the proto, but not the Metric equivalent. :thinking:

Author: Its hard, because the `Metric` has a oneof data and there are multiple choices (Gauge, Sum, Histogram,     ExponentialHistogram, Summary). Some of them have their own DataPoint specializations, so I would have to spell it out for each explicitly (or I am just vague).

Reviewer 2: Maybe then just going with `spans, metric data points and log records` ?

Author: I changed it. I am reluctant still, since Span, Metric, and LogRecord are the names of the concepts in the proto - maybe `Span`s `Metric` data points and `LogRecord`s would work?

Reviewer 2: I think we should not use the concepts from the proto and stick with "just words". Like they do in the glossary: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/glossary.md#signals

Reviewer: I agree with Joao. This is not a blocking comment for me though. So feel free to ignore this. :slightly_smiling_face:

Author: Done, thanks!

Span Links, Span Events and Metric Exemplars need to be considered differently, 
as conflicting entries there can lead to problematic data loss.
Consider a `http.host` attribute on a Span Link, which identifies the host of a
linked Span.
Following the "more specialized overwrites more general" suggestion leads to 
overwriting the `http.host` attribute of the Span, which is likely desired 
information.
Consider transferring attributes on Span Links, Span Events and Metric Exemplars
separately from the parent Span/Metric data point.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

extra newline.

> `A > B` denotes that the attribute on `A` will overwrite the attribute on  `B`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`A > B` denotes that the attribute on `A` will overwrite the attribute on `B`
```

# Attribute precedence on transformation to non-OTLP formats

**Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md)

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

<!-- toc -->

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Attribute hierarchy in OTLP messages](#attribute-hierarchy-in-otlp-messages)
- [Precedence per Signal](#precedence-per-signal)
  * [Traces](#traces)
  * [Metrics](#metrics)
  * [Logs](#logs)
  * [Span Links, Span Events and Metric Exemplars](#span-links-span-events-and-metric-exemplars)
- [Considerations](#considerations)
- [Example](#example)
- [Useful links](#useful-links)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

## Overview

This document provides supplementary guidelines for the attribute precedence
that exporters should follow when translating from the hierarchical OTLP format
to non-hierarchical formats.

A mapping is required when flattening out attributes from the structured OTLP
format, which has attributes at different levels (e.g., Resource attributes,
InstrumentationScope attributes, attributes on Spans/Metrics/Logs) to a

> non-hierarchical representation (e.g., OpenMetrics labels).

Reviewer 3: I think also mentioning Prometheus would make sense.

Author: OpenMetrics is basically Prometheus, but a bit more strict. I added a `Prometheus/` before the OpenMetrics.

> In the case of OpenMetrics, the set of labels is completely flat and must have

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the case of OpenMetrics, the set of labels is flat and must have
```

unique labels only
(<https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#labelset>).

> Since OpenTelemetry allows for different levels of attributes, it is feasible

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since OpenTelemetry allows for different levels of attributes, it is possible
```
To me feasible sounds as if it was desirable and done on purpose. WDYT?

> that the same attribute appears multiple times on different levels.

Reviewer 3: Reviewers upstream might point out that the current semantic conventions always define attributes to either be on the resource OR the telemetry signal. It might be worth pointing out in the PR description that this also covers custom attributes, which might appear anywhere.

This document aims to provide guidance on how OpenTelemetry attributes can be
consistently mapped to flat sets.

## Attribute hierarchy in OTLP messages

Since the OTLP format is a hierarchical format, there is an inherent order in
the attributes.
In this document,
[Resource](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/sdk.md)

> attributes are considered to be at the top of the hierarchy, since they are the
> most general attributes.

Reviewer 3: Not sure if I'd call them "general", they can be quite specific. How about something like this?

```suggestion
attributes are considered to be at the top of the hierarchy, since they apply
to all collected telemetry.
```

if the keys clash.

### Traces

```
Span.attributes > ScopeSpans.scope.attributes > ResourceSpans.resource.attributes
```

### Metrics

Metrics are different from Spans and LogRecords, as each Metric has a data field
which can contain one or more data points.
Each data point has a set of attributes, which need to be considered
independently.

```
Metric.data.data_points.attributes > ScopeMetrics.scope.attributes > ResourceMetrics.resource.attributes
```

### Logs

```
LogRecord.log_records.attributes > ScopeLogs.scope.attributes > ResourceLogs.resource.attributes
```

### Span Links, Span Events and Metric Exemplars

> Span Links, Span Events and Metric Exemplars need to be considered
> differently, as conflicting entries there can lead to problematic data loss.

Consider a `http.host` attribute on a Span Link, which identifies the host of a
linked Span.
Following the "more specialized overwrites more general" suggestion leads to
overwriting the `http.host` attribute of the Span, which is likely desired
information.
Transferring attributes on Span Links, Span Events and Metric Exemplars should
be done separately from the parent Span/Metric data point.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is out of the scope of these guidelines.

```

> # Attribute Precedence on transformation to non-OTLP formats

Reviewer 3: Reference this from `common/README.md` so it can be discovered better.

> 

Reviewer 3: Add a document status header.

# Attribute Precedence on transformation to non-OTLP formats

**Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md)

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

<!-- toc -->

- [Attribute Precedence on transformation to non-OTLP formats](#attribute-precedence-on-transformation-to-non-otlp-formats)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Attribute hierarchy in the OTLP message](#attribute-hierarchy-in-the-otlp-message)
  - [Precedence per Signal](#precedence-per-signal)
    - [Traces](#traces)
      - [Span Events](#span-events)
      - [Span links](#span-links)
    - [Metrics](#metrics)
      - [Metric exemplars](#metric-exemplars)
    - [Logs](#logs)
  - [Considerations](#considerations)
  - [Example](#example)
  - [Useful links](#useful-links)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

## Overview

This document provides supplementary guidelines for the attribute precedence 
that exporters should follow when translating from the hierarchical OTLP format
to non-hierarchical formats.

A mapping is required when flattening out attributes from the structured OTLP

> format has attributes at different levels (e.g., Resource attributes, 

Author: There was a `which` missing. Probably edited it 7 times and lost a word along the way

> InstrumentationLibraryScope attributes, Attributes on Spans/Metrics/Logs) to a

Author: Good catch on the InstrumentationScope!!

In the case of OpenMetrics, the set of labels is completely flat and must have 
unique labels only 
(https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#labelset).
Since OpenTelemetry allows for different levels of attributes, it is feasible
that the same attribute appears multiple times on different levels.

This document aims to provide guidance around consistently transforming 
OpenTelemetry attributes to flat sets.

## Attribute hierarchy in the OTLP message

Since the OTLP format is a hierarchical format, there is an inherent order in 
the attributes.
In this document, 
[Resource](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/sdk.md)
attributes are considered to be at the top of the hierarchy, since they are the
most general attributes. 
Attributes on individual Spans/ Metric data points/Logs are at the bottom of the
hierarchy, as they are most specialized and only apply to a subset of all data.

**A more specialized attribute that shares an attribute key with more general 
attribute will take precedence.** 

Therefore, more specialized attributes will overwrite more general ones.

> In some cases it might be desirable to overwrite an attribute like this.

Author: I was trying to come up with an example of where a data point attribute would overwrite a resource attribute, but couldn't think of anything - any ideas?

> In some cases it might be desirable to overwrite an attribute like this.

Reviewer 2: I think you removed this sentence now? It should be clear the behavior I think, without coming up with examples here. Below you have the nice yaml anyway so.. that should be enough.

<!-- TODO example -->

When de-normalizing the structured OTLP message to a flat set of key-value 
pairs, attributes that are present at Resource and InstrumentationLibraryScope 

> level will be duplicated for each Span/Metric data point/Log.

Author: I lean towards for - maybe we can get another opinion here

> level will be duplicated for each Span/Metric data point/Log.

Reviewer 2: I see `to` as it clarifies that it's duplicating "into" span etc. `for` says ok it's duplicated but where? I guess we can summon our native English speakers :D

## Precedence per Signal

Below, the precedence for each of the signals is spelled out explicitly.

> Some attributes (e.g., Span Link attributes) should only be used when flattening

Reviewer 2: I wrote this before our sync, but just going to leave here as food for thought.

> Some attributes (e.g., Span Link attributes) should only be used when flattening

Author: I updated it to not include span links / events / metric exemplars and motivated it a bit. Let me know what you think!

> Some attributes (e.g., Span Link attributes) should only be used when flattening

Reviewer 2: Looks great I think!

out attributes to transform the respective concept (Span Link attributes should
not be added when transforming attributes on spans, for example).

`A > B` denotes that the attribute on `A` will overwrite the attribute on  `B`
if the keys clash.

### Traces

```
Span.attributes > ScopeSpans.scope.attributes > ResourceSpans.resource.attributes
```

#### Span Events

```
Span.events.attributes > Span.attributes > ScopeSpans.scope.attributes > ResourceSpans.resource.attributes
```

#### Span links

```

> Span.links.attributes > Span.attributes > ScopeSpans.scope.attributes > ResourceSpans.resource.attributes

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit uncertain if link attributes should override the rest of attributes. What comes to mind is, a Link contain an attribute, say, `host.id` that was obtained from the span of a different trace, from a different host. If we do what's proposed here, we might override the `host.id` that is in the current span, potentially mixing up host ids. I'm not sure this is realistic or if it's just me, but I feel there's a problem hidden in here.

Reviewer 2: Solved in other comments.

```

### Metrics

Metrics are different from Spans and LogRecords, as each Metric has a data field
which can contain one or more data points.
Each data point has a set of attributes, which need to be considered 
independently.

```
Metric.data.data_points.attributes > ScopeMetrics.scope.attributes > ResourceMetrics.resource.attributes
```

#### Metric exemplars

```

> Metric.data.data_points.exemplars.filtered_attributes > Metric.data.data_points.attributes > ScopeMetrics.scope.attributes > ResourceMetrics.resource.attributes

Reviewer 2: I think the exemplar attributes have the same "problem" as span link and event attributes. I'm not sure if they should override the others.

```

### Logs

```
LogRecord.log_records.attributes > ScopeLogs.scope.attributes > ResourceLogs.resource.attributes
```

## Considerations

Note that this precedence is a strong suggestion, not a requirement.
Code that transforms attributes should follow this mode of flattening, but might 
diverge if they have a reason to do so. 
Furthermore, exporters can apply clash prevention, e.g., by prefixing all 

> Resource attributes with `resource.`.

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove all of this part. It's better to not give ideas of what they _could_ do I think. Finishing up in 

> diverge if they have a reason to do so.

Is good enough :)

Note that even then, a Span/Metric data point/LogRecord attribute can overwrite
the resource attribute `attribute_name`, if it is called 
`resource.attribute_name`.
Therefore, extra care needs to be taken when prefixing attributes.

## Example

> De-duplication can be thought of as a map with unique keys to which the 

Reviewer 2: Hum.. I'm not sure if we need to explain all this again. The content before makes it pretty clear the order of how things work and how one overrides the other. 

Maybe you can just remove all of this and start with "The following YAML is a representation of an OTLP message.."

attributes are added, from most general to most specialized.
First, the resource attributes are added, then the InstrumentationLibraryScope 
attributes, which overwrite the resource attributes if they share a key.
Then the attributes on the Span/Metric data point/LogRecord are added, which
again overwrite keys that are already present.
The final set of key-value pairs are all the pairs in the map.

> This YAML-like representation of a theoretical OTLP message has attributes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is a theoretical representation of an OTLP message
```

with attribute names that clash on multiple levels.

```yaml
ResourceMetrics:
    resource:
        attributes:
            # key-value pairs (attributes) on the resource
            attribute1: resource-attribute-1
            attribute2: resource-attribute-2
            attribute3: resource-attribute-3
            service.name: my-service

    scope_metrics:
        scope:
            attributes:
                attribute1: scope-attribute-1
                attribute2: scope-attribute-2
        
        metrics:
            # there can be multiple data entries here.
            data/0:
                data_points:
                    # each data can have multiple data points:
                    data_point/0:
                        attributes: 
                            attribute1: data-point-0-attribute-1

                    data_point/1:
                        attributes: 

>                             attribute1: data-point-1-attribute-1

Reviewer 2: Maybe this one can be `attribute2` to show a data point overriding a scope attribute?

Author: It does overwrite the scope attribute, scope also sets `attribute1`, or am i missing something?

```

The structure above contains two data points, thus there will be two data points
in the output.
Their attributes will be:

```yaml
# data point 0
service.name: my-service
attribute1: data-point-0-attribute-1     # only this attribute is different

> attribute2: scope-attribute-2

Reviewer 2: This one is also different right? It replaced the one on the resource `resource-attribute-2`

Author: I added more comments to clarify.

attribute3: resource-attribute-3

# data point 1
service.name: my-service
attribute1: data-point-1-attribute-1     # only this attribute is different

> attribute2: scope-attribute-2

Reviewer 2: Here as well, this is also different.
